# Commentary on Allen et al. 2017

## Rachael 
Allen et al. investigate graph conditions that lead to cooperation. In this context, weak selection means that the game doesn't have a big impact on reproductive success and P(A fixation) greater than P(B fixation) means that selection favors A. The authors explain that times until random walks meet (coalescense times) are based on p_ij (a step from vertex i to vertex j has probability p_ij). T (the time it takes until there is either fixation or extinction) - tau_ij is the expected time during which i and j have the same type (A (cooperator) or B(defector)?). An individual pays cost c when it is a cooperator and receives benefit b when its neighbors are cooperators. Lastly, p_i needs to be large for cooperation to occur, and they frame this in terms of benefit and cost: (b/c) must be greater than k. Interestingly, the threshold b/c* can differ even if average network degree is the same. 

## Liz
I think this paper is using coalescence times (time to meet as a result of random walks - is this the time it takes for a cooperator to meet a defector or just another indiviudal?) to understand how cooperation occurs in societies by using game theory (particularly donation gome theory) across a variety of structured populations represented by networks or graphs. It seems weak selection (what exactly is weak selection and why does this only work under weak selection? What is the weak vs strong selection threshold?) is important to their results and the application of this technique across the different types of population structures. A cooperator in these graphs must have a higher payoff than a random indiviudal two steps away and the two-step neighbors compete with the cooperator for opportunities to reproduce. Cooperation is favored under weak selection if benefit to cost ratio exceeds the threshold (what is the threshold?). I think the most important results are that the evolution of cooperation thrives best in networks with strong pairwise connections - showing that population structure is important. One part of this paper I would like more clarification on is the application of this to evolution. It seems the paper is specifically about the evolution of cooperation but the title and beginning make it seem like it would be more about natural selection or evolutionary dynamics in general, which they also bring up at the end. When reading theoretical papers I really struggle with how to understand the application of these models or equations and results or how it relates to the biological concept they are trying to prove. What real-world populations are these representing? Are there populations with strong pairwise connections and lots of cooperation that has evolved? 

## Bryan
This paper takes a classic game theory payoff matrix and applies it to a structured graph so that individuals aren't randomly interacting with each other (as in many agent based models) but are instead interacting with their neighbors. The authors consider two types of payoff matrices: a 'classic' one and a donation game. Further they consider the impact the topology of the graph will have on the spread or disappearance of cooperation. A main result is that cooperators needed to have a payoff higher than that of an individual two-degrees-of-separation away. This follows logic, since the cooperator would compete with those individuals for reproductive space. 
### Thoughts I had while reading it: 
If the population will all reach a state of A or B, does that mean one of the strategies is an ESS? Could that have been computed by the payoff matrix? 
I don’t understand figure 2’s line graphs. 
Why a b/c ratio and not c/b ratio? Most people are unlikely to produce a cooperative benefit for the group when the cost is larger than the benefit. Exploring a c/b ratio would then give a range where c/b is in (0,1), instead of having b/c>1. Further b/c -> infty as c->0 whereas c/b->0 as c->0 and that feels better in my heart. 
I’m surprised at the choice to include the donation game but not a public goods game given public goods games seem to be of more biological interest. (maybe I made that up and am biased by my own research) 

## Emily
This paper presents a study investigating evolutionary dynamics using the framework of a donation game on graphs and investigating coalescence times for various graphs. This informs how graph topology, representing the interaction of individuals, impacts the evolutionary outcome. The main finding is that cooperation is a winning strategy on networks with strong pairwise ties, and there are some population structures, including stars and complete bipartite graphs, on which cooperation is either impossible or at least non-conducive. Small changes to these graphs may, however, make cooperation a better strategy. In general, cooperation becomes increasingly difficult as the average degree of the graph increases, but the ability of a graph to allow competition is not determined by its average degree or by its degree sequence.

I'm still trying to understand exactly what "weak selection" is referring to, since when strength of selection is introduced it is in the framework of its impact on reproductive rate, but throughout the paper seems to be more closely tied to the cost/benefit ratio of cooperation. What is the connection here, or how do we understand one of these interpretations in light of the other?


## Ben
Evolution means change in the _frequency_ of types over time. It follows that only _populations_ evolve - not genes, species or traits (paraphrasing this rhetoric from a previous Novak paper on graph-based evolution). This highlights the potential importance of population structure for evolutionary processes. There is an analogy to disease transmission in structured populations: here we are interested in who acquires a trait from whom, and how that effects the frequency of the trait in the population (instead of the frequency of disease). Allen et al. use a coallecent approach on weighted graphs to look at the case of weak selection with simple games. Using the example involving the Prisoners' Dilema they derive a critical threshold for the evolution of cooperation as the fixed strategy in the population, showing that the benefit-to-cost ratio needs to exceed a ratio of coallescence times, which can in turn be calculated by solving a system of linear equations involving the adjacency matrix of the graph. The method applies to any analgous games of two competting strategies and any graph structure. The intriguing thing to me about this work is the identification of spatial structures that promote the evolution of cooperation. I find the idea of evolutionary amplifiers aesthetically appealing. One difficult aspect of this work is that it sort of exists on its own, it is not done in close relation to other work in the field of evolutionary biology. To make that more precise: I'd love to see these ideas tested empirically, or even brought to models of specific systems. Maybe that is out there and I'm just not aware.
