# Comments on Gupta et al. 1996 and Luksza et al. 2014

## Isaac
The first paper by Gupta et al. (1996) creates a simple mathematical model based on the genetic and amphibology concepts such as the immune system of the host, strains transmission, abundance of such strains in homogenous populations. It was interesting to see how it is possible to relate these biological concepts in a theoretical framework. The paper proposed by Luksza et al. (2014) explores the previous idea further into application. AN example is vaccine selection for the predominant strains. It would super cool if we started to model specific factors within the host that could alterate the genetic information of the virus. So, it is easier to predict possible variants and the virulance of it. An example of a factor increasing virulance on influenza virus is obesity (Honce et al. 2020). By taking this into consideration, it would be possible to create more accurate models in preventing possible more virulent strains.

Honce, R., Karlsson, E. A., Wohlgemuth, N., Estrada, L. D., Meliopoulos, V. A., Yao, J., & Schultz-Cherry, S. (2020). Obesity-related microenvironment promotes emergence of virulent influenza virus strains. MBio, 11(2), e03341-19.

## Liz
After reading Gupta et al., I felt like I get the concept they were trying to show with cross-immunity and I thought Figure 2a was really useful and good at showing that and I also liked Figure 3 a lot. One main idea being that at high levels of cross-protection it leads to linkage disequilibrium with one strain taking over instead of multiple strains coexisting in the population. I do struggle with understanding the application of this with Neisseria meningitidis, and Figure 6 I thought wasn’t very useful for displaying the different populations structures. One question I had for this paper was what real-life differences in strains might lead to one persisting in the population vs being eliminated (for example in Figure 2a what made ax and by the dominant strains vs bx and ay)? Would it be something like having a higher R0?
What I mostly understood from the Luksza and Lassig paper was that it applied the model to be able to predict future strains of influenza which is obviously very important and useful as scientists try to do that every year when making the next seasons flu vaccines. My main question is whether this model predicted flu strains better than whatever method we currently use? Is it the same method? If not, why don’t we use this if it works so well?

## Noah

The main question being asked in Gupta et al. is why do infectious pathogens maintain specific genes, as opposed to having a random distribution of genes from all the different strains that it could theoretically mate with.
They make a simple mathematical model to show that immune system pressures are a driving force behind this conservation of specific gene combinations, and propose different scenarios (Fig 6) for how different pressures might manifest.
They are seeking to highlight how evolutionary forces (and structural parts of how DNA and bacterial mating) will drive epidemiological structure when there are multiple strains.
Luksza and colleagues take a specific case of this concept and expand to include another important pressure when thinking of how a disease will manifest in a population: vaccination.
In this paper, they aim to both predict which strains of influenza might become dominant, and refine this model to predict year to year variation in a specific flu protein.
They use this model to show the evolutionary history of flu strains through a few winters, and Fig 1 really highlights how this evolution happens.

My main takeaways from these papers really concerns the evo/eco relationships that are inherent in disease systems.
I believe it highlights the evolutionary arms race that we discuss often in evolutionary relationships, but in an interesting way since one of the pressures on pathogens is an evolving entity unto itself.
Gupta highlights this relationship as we see rules emerge for how strains will occur under different types of pressure.
I also can see that pieces of this concept come from the structure of DNA itself, since only genes that are far apart structurally are likely to be able to recombine at high rates.
In the Luksza paper, I found it really interesting that, while the year to year strain phylogeny was fairly consistent, there still is a fair amount of uncertainty.
This uncertainty is very important in my work as one of the things I am thinking about is how to incorporate epidemiological and genetic information to better inform transmission trees

## Rachael 
Gupta et al. discuss how cross-protection contributes to a set of discordant strains becoming dominant. (Discordant strains don't have shared alleles for immmunologically important loci). When cross-protection is zero, all strains equilibrate at the same level, given that they have the same R_0 (the authors call this symmetric equilibrium). To test this theoretical result, they use data for a pathogen with two important epitopes (with eight and 14 families, respectively). The null hypothesis that there is random association between these epitopes is rejected using a chi-square test for significance - only a handful of discordant combinations survive at high frequency.

Luksza et al. argue that two factors dictate strain fitness: adaptive epitope mutations and detrimental non-epitope changes. Using genomic data, the authors predict evolution of influenza clades from a year to the next. They predict clade frequency in the next season: $$ \hat{X_v}(t+1) = \sum_{i:v,t}x_ie^{f_i} $$.
They also want the f_i for each strain to change based on deleterious mutations in i and cross-immunity to strains that have appeared previously: $$f_i = f_0 - L(a_i) - \sum_{j:t_j<t_i}x_jc(a_i,a_j)$$.
The value of the cross-immunity function depends on changes in strain i and in strain j (a_i and a_j).
$$ W_v = X_v(t+1)/X_v(t) $$. The predicted W_v for some clades is greater than one (mostly because antigenic mutations appear in the context of a lineage that has had more fitness-enhancing mutations recently).

## Ben
Gupta et al. address the question of how distinct lineages of an infectious pathogen can maintain and cocirculate despite rapant opportunities for the exhange of genetic information which, absent some countervailing processes should homogenize distinc strains. They use a simple mathematical model which assumes the dominant actor in the process is the host immune system, and which assumes no spatial structure in the host population (and thus no spatial constraints on genetic exchange). In analysis of the model, several classic elements of theoretical ecology / epidemiology emerge in a new context. Equilibrium prevalence of the strains depends on the degree of cross-protection. When cross protection is low, the dynamics decouple and each strain comes to rest at a prevalence of 1 - 1/R0. When cross protection is high, there is an 'asymetrical equilibrium' where one strain comes to dominate. There is a critical level of cross protection above which the symatrical equilbrium collapases. The model predicts cocircualting strains should show linkage disequilibrium among dominant antigens modulated by the degree of cross protection, and that 'strain-structuring' immune responses can be leveraged to identify dominant antigens. THe paper introduces an elegant model that resonates with some key ideas in theoretical ecology, but it is also notable / admirable in the way it engages with data to advance the argument of the model.

Some similar ideas emerge in the predictive fitness model of Luksza et al., applied to short-term (season-to-season) prediction of influenza evolution (and with the benefit of ~20 years of advances in modeling, epidemiology and evolution of infectious diseases.) The model predicts clade frequencies 'next' season, based on their frequencies 'this' season, and a strain-specific growth rate model for the strains that make up each clade. In its basic form this is a model of structured population growth that projects into the future by doing the 'accounting' of abudnances and growth rates (which can be a function of the state of the system and/or exogenous variables, eg frequency-dependence). Like all such models the crux is the growth rate function (eqn 2 here). In this case we have two components: short-term accumulation of deliterous mutations and cross protection in the host population from previous infection from related strains. Holding the impacts of deleterious mutations constant for a moment, strains grow fastest on a per-capita basis when the frequency of (immunogenically) related strains (ie strains that illicit strong cross protection) is low. Going back to eqn 1, a clade will be more prevalent next season when a) its component strains are more abundant now AND b) their growth rates are high, due to low cross-protection. Thus strains that become abundant enough to 'gain a footlhold', yet still have plenty of 'fertile ground' in terms of host population naivity, are favored. In the second half ot he paper Lukdza et al. show this model is pretty promising in terms of real-world performance.

## Emily

### The maintenance of strain structure in populations of recombining infectious agents
This paper investigates the ability for infectious agents that have some method of genetic recombination in their reproduction to persist with distinct strains, using a model in which there are no constraints on genetic exchange and where selection is based on host immune response to existing strains. Given an agent with two loci, each with two possible alleles, and allowing recombination for a total of four variants, we let a host be immune to one strain, with some level gamma of “cross-protection” providing partial immunity to strains that share one of the alleles of the strain to which the host is immune. We find gamma to be a bifurcation parameter, where “high enough” values of gamma lead to a situation in which one set of discordant strains strongly dominates leading to an “asymmetric equilibrium,” and lower values of gamma (e.g. gamma = 0) result in a system with a “symmetric equilibrium” where all possible strains independently equilibrate at the same level. The analysis shows that when cross-protection is high, a population will be structured by independent strains, although subordinate groups will continue to persists through recombination events. Thus, the prevalence of different strains of an infectious agent are determined by the strength of immune response to particular strains and the level of cross-protection given by that immune response. This theoretical framework is proposed to have the potential to be used to identify dominant immune responses in many pathogens that appear to be transmitted as discrete strains despite the possibility of genetic recombination.

### A predictive fitness model for influenza
This paper discusses the ability of a model to predict the predominant strands of influenza from one year to the next by considering the evolutionary tree of clades of influenza. The predictions of the futures of known clades are given by averaging the expectations from equiprobable trees, and this prediction is limited to only the following year due to the inability to predict new mutations arising over longer periods of time. In exploring the evolution of influenza strains, the paper finds that high-fitness clades tend to seed more high-fitness clades, so that clades arising close to the trunk of the evolutionary tree are more likely to persist through beneficial mutations than those arising further from the trunk. The model can be used in vaccine strain selection by taking into account cross-immunity between a vaccine strain and the circulating strains in a season.



