# Commentary on May 1972

## Emily 
May gives an overview of how the stability of an ecological system is related to the complexity of that system, largely by studying the stability of modeled systems with various sizes and levels of connectedness. In general, there is a threshold above which too large of a connectance or too strong average interactions lead to instability of the system. Systems are found to be more stable when there are closely connected “subsystems” that are in turn connected rather than having strong connectivity among all or most species individually. I think this makes sense intuitively, since in this case, should a single species be disturbed so that it becomes extinct, the species closely connected in that subsystem may be strongly affected, but the effect on other species will be dampened as they are further down the chain and have most of their strong interactions elsewhere. If a species that is strongly connected to all or most other species is disturbed, then all of those species will have to bear the full brunt of the loss of this key species without the damping effect of subsystems.

I really enjoyed reading this two-page article and seeing the difference between how (at least some) scientific articles read 50 years ago compared to the majority of articles today. The generality and familiarity were nice, as opposed to the stiff nature of many of today’s papers. This was also refreshing since I did some work on food webs in my undergrad that used the notion of connectance to think about the stability of a system and how that may allow us to identify keystone species. In that project, most of my references were relatively recent publications that generalized results from modeling, and I had no idea that work was being done on this as early as the 70s.

## Rachael

May discusses stability in systems with n populations of different species. A randomly generated n x n interaction matrix will set up a system that is then deterministic. The probability that a given system generated by this process is unstable (P(n, alpha) of instability) will tend to 1 when alpha is large. Instability can also result from high connectance, C. A system with C_1 * a_1 approx. equal to C_2 * a_2 of another system means that the systems will have comparable stability. Lastly, even though increasing these two parameters will in general destabilize a system of n spp. populations, organization of the system into "blocks" is stabilizing in the scenario mentioned at the end of the paper. 

## Noah

Whoops, sorry about the tardiness.
This is a nice short and sweet paper that discusses some interesting features of deterministic systems of multiple species interacting.
The first major thing May discusses is that for the interaction matrix **A** (which has -1 along the diagonal through assuming density dependence and carefully choosing a time-scale), if it has negative real parts of the eigen values, then the system will be stable.
Through a process I do not quite understand, May is able to pull out a probability of stability by relating the average interaction term to the number of species in the system.
The average interaction term must be less than one over the square root of the number of species, which quickly becomes very small, though is helped some by the diagonals being 0.
The other thing that I think is interesting is that if all interactions are negative, then this model would predict the system would be completely stable (though possibly that stability is at 0?)

The implications of this are very interesting to me and how we think about the dogma of ecology.
I think it is often stated that diverse communities are more stable than non-diverse ones.
However, this paper seems to imply that this diversity should be matched with weak interactions between the species that are in the system, or possible with lots of species, but lots of negative interactions.
Systems with less diversity are usually stable, and can have stronger interactions between the species, especially positive ones, though that still has a limit.

## Isaac
This paper was very insteristing to read because  it allows us to understand stability in systems between species in regards to their connectance. It is interesting to see that other papers have build upon this concept. SOme by including ecological interation (comptetion, mutualism, etc) and dispersal among patches. 
The only part of this parper that I little confused was when May mention a the statistical distribution would be used, but it did not mention which one. 

One interesting app;lication is the idea of introducing a disturbance element to the system and seing how long it takes the system to become stable or if ever does. I thought that was the highlight of the paper.

